Definition of a Royalty Payment

Royalties are paid for the continuous use of a piece of work, such as payments made to an author for a book that is on the market.

These expenses are in addition to one-time initial fees, such as for the purchase of the property. The payments are usually lower than upfront fees because they're a continuous regular expense.

A franchisee experiences daily sales as his main source of revenue. However, the regular monthly income that the franchisor earns is based on royalty payments from each franchisee.
Why Charge Royalty Fees?

Recurrent royalty fees are effectively contributions to the entire organization. The payments are used to maintain the system and ensure that all avenues flow smoothly between the franchisor and franchisee.

Royalty payments are typically paid to the franchisor to stay current on technological advances, as well as to enable the creation and marketing of fresh products and services. Also, these payments are used to pay expenses that are incurred at the franchisor's headquarters, such as rent, utilities, and employee compensation.

Royalty payments can enable the franchise company to extend its products and services into other regions and possibly into other countries. As more creative advertising is launched, the organization's brands become increasingly identifiable so higher business and profits are ideally realized for both the franchisee and the franchisor.
What's in It for the Franchisee 

Although the franchisee may not understand the need for royalty fees at first, the payments create a win-win situation for both sides.

Let's say you want to open a pizza restaurant. You can hang out your sign and advertise as "Joe's Pizza," or you can do it as "Domino's" or "Papa John's." In your initial months of operation and before word gets out that your pizzas are incredibly good and worthy of purchase, the bulk of your sales will most likely come from name recognition. Customers call Domino's or Papa John's for their pizzas because a certain quality is implied by the name, and people tend to gravitate toward what is familiar.

But you can't advertise as Papa John's unless you pay a franchise fee and ongoing royalties. And franchisors definitely don't let just anyone hang out those signs. In exchange for initial royalty fees, you'll most likely receive some extensive training into how to make fantastic pizzas and how to most profitably run your new enterprise so as to reflect well on the brand. There's definitely something very valuable in the equation for franchisees as well. 
How Much Should a Franchisee Expect to Pay in Royalty Fees?

Royalty payment systems can follow one of the several formats.

The most common type is a fee that's calculated on anywhere from 5 percent to 8 percent of the franchisee's total gross sales, but there are some franchise organizations that charge a higher percentage based on net sales – that is, income after expenses. This rate is usually somewhere between 6 percent and 10 percent. Fees are typically paid on a monthly basis.


Franchising

Let’s start with franchising. A franchise is a business model which comprises three key elements – use of the brand, use of the business system and payment of a fee for the use of these two together. Many refer to franchising as having a three legged stool which includes these three elements.

What is it?

Franchising is when you allow the use of your business name and business system for the payment of a fee upfront and/or ongoing.

Why use it:

    Allows someone to use your name and trademark
    You are paid a fee of some kind, generally it is an upfront fee plus an ongoing royalty payment such as a percentage of sales or a fee per product sold
    Can be a more cost effective solution to expand initially
    Allows operational control for consistency
    Provides an exit strategy for the business
    Common branding and marketing for brand awareness

Common Uses:

    Used for business expansion to grow a business model in wide array of industries including service, food, lodging, retail, professional services, medical, and many others
    Great use for manufacturing and distribution businesses
    Converting other companies into your franchise
    Used to help co-brand other existing similar types of businesses

Limitations:

While you have the ability to enforce operational requirements and consistencies, only the franchisee is able to manage employees.

On the other hand, licensing comes with much less regulation and stipulations associated with the process. It also does not afford the licensor with as much control or influence on licensee’s business.

What is it?

Licensing is when you allow the use of your business name and/or marks for a fee.

Why use it:

    Allows someone to use your name and trademark
    You are paid a fee of some kind, generally it is an upfront fee and could include an ongoing royalty payment such as a percentage of sales or a fee per product sold under the brand name
    Can be a more cost effective solution to expand initially
    Common branding and marketing for brand awareness

Common Uses:

    Often used for sale of products, an example might be a toy manufacturer licensing the rights to use Disney character names and images
    Sometimes is used as alternative expansion model to achieve brand awareness and get more market coverage quickly
    Used to help co-brand other existing similar types of businesses or in Master arrangements where a brand is licensed to a third party in other parts of the world (International Master Franchise)

Limitations:

The greatest limitation of licensing is its ability for you as the licensor to be able to control operating procedures of the business operation.

When buying a franchise, an entrepreneur should look at balance sheets and bottom line and compare it to similar franchises in similar areas. Also, they should perform a name-brand availability search and investigate Intellectual Property issues such as patent ownership.

Anyone selling a franchise should be sure to protect their Intellectual Property and create comprehensive work manuals and maintenance programs. Anyone selling a license should ensure that their Intellectual Property is protected by law and specify what rights it grants the licensee.

Both licensing and franchising are viable expansion vehicles; there is no wrong answer to which is best for a particular business model. In my experience, the companies that should franchise are ones that are concerned about the quality of their brand as it is represented in a given market.

Franchising allows the franchisor to dictate most, if not all of the operational responsibilities and standards to be followed by Franchisees. Licensing on the other hand is a much looser relationship and will include only either the brand OR the business model, not both.

 

 

Before taking this step forward into either distribution system, I would recommend speaking with someone who could reference experience in developing third party distribution systems and can help in evaluating a given business model as to whether Licensing or Franchising is the best growth vehicle.

Franchise Marketing Systems has provided you with two additional educational paths to explore above.  You can download the franchise expansion guide or take our quick business model assessment to understand more what option is best for your business.